Subject: Player Pianos

On Fri, Dec 2, 2016 at 11:32 AM, Kyle Owen <kylevowen@gmail.com> wrote:
> Hi Charlie!

Hi!  Before I start, have you been getting any recent e-mail from me, or is
this a new address?  There are some issues [they can wait a bit] but just want
to make sure you are getting them.  I heard you helped Bob out a few months
ago, etc.

> I'm quite impressed to hear you're also into these mechanical wonders! I've
> not yet played a push-up pianola, nor have I seen one in person yet. 

I lost a good friend less than three years ago.  He was pretty famous in the
world of mechanical piano music Randolph Herr.  I can elaborate on that
depending on what you already know [which could be nothing, you tell me].

> I'm actively looking for an Ampico (preferably), Duo-Art or Welte-Mignon
> reproducer, but it's slim pickings around my area, apparently.

I can't say what became of his collection which is a damn shame.  [His family
was all deceased except for a really shit of a brother who I can't stand, who
actually threatened to sue me on a NOTION he thought he had as a total greedy
ignoramus.]

Randy was also into restoring old cash registers.  My former place where the
PDP-8s were stored and rescued by Bob, John Wilson and Victor Nahigian was also
a place where some of the instruments were delivered for a variety of reasons.
Randy was the only person I know with a "heavier" hobby/business than dealing
with computers in DEC cabinets!

Thus, at times, I gave him permission to have delivered/stored transiently a
whole parade of instruments in either the two-car garage or the ground-floor.
[The place is on a hill, so rear delivery is off the street on a community
driverway while front door delivery is ground level good for rolling
instruments in and out.  Bob may have told you about the "path" some of the
PDP-8's left the building, same for the various pianos.

The only one that left was my own as a kid, a Kranich and Bach from the
next-to-last year of production of good units, a console-height upright which
is currently in a for sale/storage situation in Long Island at a dealer that
Randy dealt with for some of the work.  They did the wood restoration where
relevant and their movers moved everything wherever, etc.

Randy would also use the garages for the "carcasses" of the cash registers, and
in the end we had to get rid of about 400 pounds of worthless bases [all the
important parts already stripped and gone] and none of the pianos or pump
organs, etc.  But this greedy fool had to be told by a lawyer to butt out.
It's a long forgotten issue, but in no way reflected on Randy; he had very
little to do with his surviving brother.  [I heard other relatives were more
reasonable, but this creep is now alone with his greed.]

The centerpiece of Randy's collection was an 10' Steinway grand with the
modifications by Aeolian to have a built-in pianola in it.  The two companies
made exactly 12 of them in Queens not far from my former place.  This one had a
history as well, search for Stanford White, an infamous NY-er involved in a
love triangle with Harry K. Thaw and his wife.  It was a famous scandal from
about 100 years ago, and Randy had totally restored it.

I only played it as a piano in Randy's home [also in Queens, not far from the
Sam Ashe store as explained below], but as a pianola, that device was on stage
in Carnegie Hall with Randy playing some rolls as part of a performance by
Michael Feinstein, a well-known Gershwin person as well.

All of us were involved in the Gershwin project in various capacities.

Back in the late 80's I had a girlfriend who was a piano teacher who used the
ground floor [same building!] as a music studio.  I had bought her an upright
MX-100B Yamaha Disklavier which is very useful for student use because of all
the tricks [play only one hand while allowing the student to play the other not
being auto-played at the time, a split point and a control determines if you
want the left of the right, etc.

In any case, she was registered with a local music store [everything is in
Queens!] called Sam Ashe, and I had bought stuff there myself.  We knew some
composer wannabes that hung around there, and as a result that gave us some
minor favors for a few things.

From that connection to Sam Ashe, there came a meeting of me and Randy and a
famous musicologist named Artis Wodehouse [who was living in Randy's upstairs
rooms he often rented out; she was in NY for months working on a project in
nearby Brooklyn.  [She was originally from NY, specifically the Bronx, but was
now in the LA area, but had to be in NY for some months, and Forest Hills is
only a subway ride away from Brooklyn College].

In Brooklyn College's music department, she was using a pianola pushed up to
the same exact model Disklavier as we had, and was making diskettes of her
attempts to get the proper expression playing rolls originally record by
Gershwin of his own rolls recorded at Aeolian, etc.

She had already had an NEA grant to study his music listening intently to film
sound recordings of Gershwin made back in the day, and part of that was writing
down precise detailed sheet music for these performances, etc.  She is
considered THE Gershwin  expert, and got a grant for the express purpose of
doing these diskettes; the grant was matched by Yamaha who had provided the
MX-100B to Brooklyn College, etc.

These "raw" recordings now had to be critiqued by her to find the best takes
that truly represented just how Gershwin played these pieces according to his
personal style as she could attest to, etc.

There came to be a problem between Yamaha and Warner Brothers/Elektra/Nonesuch
records.  They were in negotiations to produce the CD that became Gershwin
Plays Gershwin, the Piano Rolls.

But this was after Yamaha had commandeered the diskettes and Artis Wodehouse is
computer-illiterate!

If you ever want to screw up a deal between two big companies, all you need are
lawyers on both sides!

Years back, my friend Stan Rabinowitz [you may know the name from some work on
OS/8] wrote a VAX-based excellent Scrabble program.  He wanted to have it given
away free, but when they asked, the DEC lawyers insisted on checking for
permission from Selchow and Righter, the owners of the board game.; of course
they called the other company's lawyers, and long story short between both sets
of lawyers it never happened!

In this case, it was the lawyers of Warner Brothers and the lawyers of Yamaha
couldn't figure out the relevant quick details and what follows is how I solved
a problem they created:

Artis did MOST of the work in Brooklyn College on a huge stack of diskettes in
the proprietary Yamaha format, which is in the most simplified form is:

PC format for a 720K 3.5" DD diskette with no common sector purpose, just the
same raw format.

The instrument supports a form of protection which is two-fold:  a)  The normal
slider on the diskette to write-protect it, b) a copy protection which mangles
the format on purpose.

The copy protection and irrelevantly the possibility of 2:1 interleave is what
distinguishes the protected disks from the typical ones.

The 2:1 interleave is for the benefit of the prior MX-100A original model that
had a slow CPU.  The MX100B and all newer models don't require it, but most
models don't have the ability to convert the diskettes for the benefit of the
original model, so this is for the most part an irrelevant detail.  [But my
DCK10R grand Disklavier can reformat them to remove the interleave or actually
put it in for the benefit of the A model].

More importantly, there is a nasty difference:  In all cases, if a disk is
protected, track 0 head 0, normally consisting of sectors 1 through 9 is not
normal.  In one variant, sector 9 is just missing; I believe this is the one
for the earlier model compatibility; newer diskettes have a faux sector 109
header, but the effect is the same; you cannot copy the data!

At the time, we had a nearby student who had purchases an MX100C which while
newer is essentially a step backwards.  Volume is not actual electrical
intensity of the electromagnets pulling down the keys, rather it is a
mechanical kludge that prevents some of the hammer energy from being
transferred to the strings with a blocking strip made with a rubber edge.  It
sorta works, but not as well as the original on both the A and B models.  At
the time, they also had a grand controller in a little "ottoman" that was
attached to the piano by an umbilical cord,  but by the time they got to what I
have [the DKC10R era a few years later, that's a 5' 3" baby grand and the
controller is a smaller box that goes under the right-hand area where you sit;
this is the way all newer grands are done; this one is screwed upwards into the
bottom of the piano horizontal case.]

The MX-100C controller was electronically a box that was placed on the top of
the upright via a cable, and this was also what the spinette models that came
out later used.  The A and B have the electronics in the top cover which
partially interferes with opening the top cover, thus why they made it a lot
smaller and also separate, etc.

The MX-100C has the ability to copy cuts as opposed to the entire performances
on the diskette; the earlier models could not do that.  But it was all for
naught as these fools at Yamaha had modified Artis' disks without telling her!

These disks all had labels slapped on them  Copyright Yamaha - not for release.
That is simply not true, as the work done to create them was from an NEA grant.
She could do whatever she wanted to with the diskettes, etc.  But they exceeded
their authority and in the process prevented what was needed!

In 48 hours [no sleep!] all of the following was done:

3 pieces were finalized on our MX-100B; she is a perfectionist and created them
there; we had the 1911 Aeolian pianola there that Randy had restored for her;
they found it in Belgium in poor condition, and he had to do extensive
restoration including overcoming incompetence:  The vacuum controllers are
meant to be openable with felt gaskets that admittedly eventually leak [at
about the same rate as the rubber tubing has to be replaced, about every
decade].  These idiots EPOXIED the little boxes closed!  Thus, they could not
be regulated.  Randy had to carefully break the glue seal and many of the boxes
wound up with damage that had to be repaired, and quite a few of the covers had
to be done over 100%.  And of course, fabricate all the felt gaskets.  [Note:
Randy had his own pianola that was a work-in-progress and not done at the time;
the one found in Europe was restored but due to the slight haste, it was never
"perfect" and while playing it did have a very subtle "clack" that when I
finally got to hear Randy's when it was finally just about done [it needed a
polish job on the wood, comparable to piano finishing] it was much quieter; he
said that with enough time, Artis' could be 100% restored, etc.  Note that
during the recording, this is meaningless because the Disklavier is playing off
the diskettes in their pro studio in Manhattan on a 12' concert grand in the
sound-proof room, etc.]

Thus, it was more than adequate to the task, and I got to see what Artis did
for some of them to finish them off, but she had literally hundreds of "takes"
on some rolls, in part because she had to become more skilled at the fine
points of playing a pianola.  Randy taught her.  She and I are piano players,
but a pianola is another thing altogether.  You get a  taste of that with the
Story and Clark, etc.  But there are more dynamic variables with a pianola, and
he modded them to include the extra slide expression control that was only
"authentically" added to the Steinway/Aeolian dozen pianos.  It makes it even
more complicated to play, but gets even better results.  Thus, only two
pianolas to our knowledge ever had the extra control added [and the 12
Steinways of course!]

The rest of what Artis and I did was have her pick out the exact cuts on the
piles of disks she wanted to be in the final CD.  That had to be done anyway,
but in this case, the expediency was because Warner asked for two demo
diskettes for a very important reason:

1)  They wanted a diskette that would repeat in an infinite loop Swanee alone.
That was easy to produce relatively speaking.  I also labeled the diskettes
myself which involves using the pedals and the keyboard to setup characters you
see on the LCD readout while the instrument was playing.  I was an expert
because of our experience with ours; Artis only knew it could be done, but not
how.

2)  They wanted a 12-cut diskette of most of the material that did make it to
the CD.  They told us which ones they wanted.

3)  They didn't ask for this, but we also made a third diskette with other
pieces some of which wound up on the CD, others would have been a volume II if
it ever happened [it never did; Artis did a Jellyroll Morton disk instead]

[Note:  Artis was so scared of those Yamaha idiots, she didn't want me to make
copies of these diskettes, but I never told her I made BACKUP copies with
Teledisk, the same program I make DECmate diskettes with.  It is savvy of
format change, interleave, etc. and makes a perfect copy.]  [I of course have
them for my own use.]  [It would be rather foolish if the diskettes got damaged
when it was released!]

The Disklavier, all models can make diskette copies [or format and copy or just
format and erase the directory, it is a low-level format if relevant].  So,
making copies in the field wasn't a problem, and many were made.

The impetus of all of this was there was a music show that year in Vancouver,
and they brought a Disklavier grand to the show and wanted the first two
diskettes, and we had to have them in the local Queens Fedex office literally
earlier enough for same-day delivery, and I did it! [no sleep, literally!].
[Artis took a couple short naps.] [My girlfriend stayed away from us, realizing
this was going to be at least an all-nighter, but it was a double all-nighter!]

The late afternoon of the first day is when we went to the student's house and
realized we were screwed because of the protection, but then I brainstormed a
way to get this done!

We bought [I paid] the MX-100B at a local piano dealer based in Long Island
about 3 miles from where I live NOW with my wife called Frank and Camille's

We had gone back to them and they were demoing some new equipment to augment
the sound, what is known as the DOM-30 [Disklavier Orchestra Module] and I had
read the manual when we at the dealer.  They were using it with custom
Disklavier diskettes from Hal Leonard that are sold for the purpose.  Of course
it uses external MIDI and runs off the Disklavier [note:  With a .5 second
real-time buffer; you have to do that with a mechanical piano, not a synth!]
And there are many of these diskettes [I collect them of course!]. Some of them
are for alternate tone generator modules [TG-100, or Yamaha extended general
MIDI; I now also have the former, and software for Windows to perform the
latter to do Yamaha X-G.] [Note:  Today I own one of these!]

There was also a subset of the DOM-30 known as the DRC-20 [Data Recorder
Control].  It lacks the tone generator, thus it is not all that useful, but
they thought it could sell as a MIDI recorder.

We went back to Sam Ashe and asked our friend the manager.  I said I fully
intend to very carefully open and repack and return, and he agreed, so we
walked out of Sam Ashe with the DRC-20.

Both of these units use a proprietary format unrelated, BUT they can READ-only
the Disklavier format.  The DOM-30 can then play the MIDI from that source [or
External Midi as used with a Disklavier] and then can output to its external
MIDI what it reads on the Disklavier format input.

Devoid of any media, it is just a very fast moving MIDI stream that certain
instruments cannot keep up with.  However, hooked to the MIDI IN on the
Disklavier [and then Recording] you can make the diskettes anyway one cut at a
time.

Thus, we built up the diskette one chosen cut at a time, and many hours later I
had the desired final product including manual and pedal labeling for the
benefit of the screen.

Today I have software that can do this on a PC with 3.5" diskettes, but back in
the day, this was the only way to get around the copy protection literally in
just less than two days [on no sleep].

With some difficulty, I even eventually got paid by Warner for my services, but
the point is the show went very well, and helped sales, etc.  The CD became the
then most popular non-pop CD.  1990 there wasn't all that much available yet,
etc.

Frank and Camille got involved with this as well:  They loaned out spinette
Disklaviers all over Long Island primarily in Bank branches playing the second
diskette.  I told them I created the diskettes; they were impressed!

Still later, after this got going, we were all on Good Morning America [mostly
Artis] but I was briefly seen on the World News Overnite expanded segment that
shows some hours later; Randy got cut entirely.

In both of them I had CLA Systems on TV and the name of the MIDISOFT corp
program on the screen; this was my idea.  They overlay-ed the piano keys
playing, the roll moving and the computer screen creating measures in real-time
for potential recording and auto-moving over so the right-most part of the
screen always had the latest measure as it was being played.  [This was in
Windows 3.1.]

I told MIDISOFT about this, their company got some nationwide free advertising,
and for my efforts I got a NFR [Not for Resale] copy of their entire product
line.  I already had their MIDI interface that attaches to
SoundBlaster-compatible cards on the joystick controller, etc.

So, that was a nice post-script to the story.  And Randy came over at times and
we recorded rolls of him playing as well, and of course I have those as well.
I have the only known copy in most cases.



> I had picked my Story & Clark up in Roswell, GA, off Craigslist several years
> ago and got it into mostly working condition in about two months. I think it
> still needs some tweaks, but I'm pretty happy with it.

I just wish Randy were available to help you; I guarantee he would, even if he
had to drive south to look at it himself!

> Maybe I'll save up my dollars and get a Banjo-Orchestra from Mr. Ramey. :)

I know of those things as well; they show up in a few places.  Randy fixed up
one of those for Steven Spielberg he has in his home.

He also did things for collectors, such as authentic cross-restorations to
change over Welte to Aeolian, etc. on pianos shipped to Queens from Europe.

> What instruments do you have?

I have the DCK10R on a 5'3" grand and an old Yamaha synth.  They also have an
old Thinkpad 760EL with a P133 in it so that Teledisk works.

All programs written in Turbo Pascal have a runtime bug that can SOMETIMES be
fixed using the SLOWMO or other software programs to slow the machine down.
Unfortunately, that technique doesn't work on Teledisk, so it forever must be
run on a machine based on a Pentium 166 or slower.  Ideally I would like a
770EL which I think is the same machine with a P166; I actually have two of
them!  [I got one on ebay for $12, only thing wrong is the battery is dead but
could be rebuilt.]

The other one was given to me with a broken hard disk, originally 540 MB and
sold with an optional upgrade to 1040 MB, but actually it can work either UP to
or up to LESS than 4.8 GB, not sure [and worse, there are several models of 4.8
GB, so it may really matter].  Newer 2.5" IDE disks use an extended interface
so they don't quite work [I've tried].  But I got on ebay a new-in-box [NIB]
3.2 GB disk and it works fine.

I upgraded the 16 MB to the max which is 80 MB, and it runs Windows 98 SE lite
with the "unofficial service pack" [I was involved with the 98lite project and
the Service Pack project online on the PCforums of msfn.com.

This machine has a P133, a removably 6x CD-ROM sharing a slot with either a
second battery or a .3.5" diskette.  I have two batteries, but I don't have the
blank front to in when the battery is in [totally cosmetic; I can use the
diskette-in bezel].  I generally have the diskette in for use with Teledisk.

The machine also has a second external diskette, so it is great for copying
diskettes with Teledisk.  I also have a PCMCIA network card so it can plug into
the local 8-port 10/100/1000 switch nearby.

The second 760EL I got on ebay cost me $12 shipped in a nice carrying bag from
Targus, another CD and another external diskette.  Only 32 MB, and it came with
an add-on hard disk that is 2.2 GB, so it doesn't need anything;  This is my
backup unit since both of them are capable of running Teledisk and the
proprietary Yamaha software we bought from an ex-Yamaha employee that handles
pretty much all of their formats including the DOM30/VRC-20 proprietary MIDI
format and of course Disklavier format.  It won't copy whole Yamaha diskettes,
but I talked to the author, it is also Turbo Pascal but has the rixed runtime
so doesn't need to be slowed down, he is of course aware of the 1982 Teledisk
that can copy, etc. but he did it Yamaha's way, etc. and we agrees that since I
have both programs, I don't care that he didn't implement that.  [But you can
copy cuts, which would have been good enough  back in the day; that doesn't
check the overall disk protect, just the entire disk copy function.

This machine and my Yamaha Synth are on a pro A-Frame stand from Quik-Lok with
three positions for keyboards, but I only have one and I positioned another out
of the way.  The top level has the 760EL ThinkPad on it.

To the right of this is the Yamaha Grand Disklavier, and to the right of that
is matching a faux Chinese lacquer old dining room table also finished in brass
and plano black.  But on and under the table are three PCs, one I made years
ago that has a 3.5/5.25 TEAC combo diskette on it.  I can run Teledisk on it by
disabling both the L! and L2 cache.  It also runs Windows 98SE with the
unofficial service pack and also Windows XP and is also on the network switch.

Next to that [actually above] is one of my T400 laptops that I am doing a lot
of editing on to finish the P?S Extended PDP-8 Simulator package on.  I can
just about handle it with my tired MG eyes, but I have to be careful to not use
the entire 1440x900 screen because it does cause some fatigue.  But for editing
at 150x zoom on 12 pt text, it is very good especially late at night when I am
even more tired.  Also on the network switch

To its right is a "hot-rodded" DELL SFF Vostro 230 now with 4 GB and a 500 GB
disk and 256 MB video card instead of the crappy built=in Intel "extreme"
graphics chip.  It has a DVD-RW drive and is attached to a large screen Samsung
monitor I really cannot do much with, but it gets a lot of usage from others
"passing through".  I t has on it Windows XP, Windows 7 Ultimate and Windows 10
Pro.  I also have the free upgrade to Windows 10 on the T400, but I removed it;
can always add that on later when I get around to upgrading that machine to
another 1.0 TB diskette.  That's the mobile version of the same chipset as in
the Dell, but the Dell is marginally faster.  to the right of that, is a
rollable TV cart that holds a lot of stuff in the base and on the top is my
ThinkPad X32, the machine I take monthly for my IVIG treatments at the
hospital.  This is a machine with 1024x768 and is a 12.9 " screen, and i can
completely work with that.  In fact most of my work for years is on that
machine because I have developed better than normal near vision, as long as I
can take in the entire screen [and why I cannot use a wide-screen laptop
universally].  That machine is a 2004 Thinkpad, literally the best machine ever
made then, and upgraded to maximum CPU of 2.0 GHz with 2.0 MB cache and 2.0 GB
memory and a 7200 RPM 100 GB HGST hard disk. [Only a few made are larger, but
they are all 5400 RPM.]

This machine is also home of a PCMCIA SATA card that connects to my little farm
of disks:

1)   I have 6 2.0 TB external hard disks in good cases and an external Sata
Blu-Ray burner..  All of that connects to the base; the actual laptop pops out
of the base [which also takes peripheral devices such as more batteries or an
another hard disk or  CD/DVD burners, etc.]

So, I get a lot of good usage of that machine, which is fast enough to keep up
even today, etc.  [Just isn't 64 bits] this is also on the switch and was one
of the first machines with 10/100/1000 base T networking.

On the other side of the room is my wife Kathy's T400 which already has the 1
TB disk and also was upgraded to the 3.06 GHz chip; I had to take it apart
because the fan on the cooler was dying, so I bought a faster chip on ebay
because I had to take it apart anyway, etc.  When i need to do this on mine, I
will do the same CPU upgrade.  Hers has 8 GB and when I get around to it I will
upgrade from 4 to 8 as well.]

Her's is wireless, so not on the switch, but does a pretty good job.

On the other end of the other side is my DECmate III which has had some issues,
some of which we should  continue talking about.

All of the machines on or near the switch are ultimately connected to an AC1200
Wireless Ethernet bridge.

Upstairs in :"the dungeon" is what we laughingly sometimes call "my room" which
has in it another machine uses as a home server and the cable modem and the
AC-1900 Netgear R6300 router.  I hope to reclaim the room at some point as we
declutter the whole place, but it realistically is gonna be a long and drawn
out thing, etc.

We just got a speed upgrade on the cable modem.  Measured is above rated, which
is generally the case with Cablevision.  Measured 115 MBPS in and 37 MB out.
Nominal is 100 and 35.  I use GOTOMYPC and TeamViewer a lot [With Bob the
latter, with clients the former].  and the extra bandwidth really makes it as
if I was actually there!


 
> And I'd love to hear of your times with the Gershwin Plays Gershwin album
> sometime!

Well, if you got rhis far, you just did!

Anyway, I look forward to discussing other subjects when you get a chance.

There are not too many of us who do computers AND music.  John Wilson plays the
recorder and bagpipes and a restored harpsichord.

cjl

ps:  If you ever get a chance to come to NY, please do and we can put you up,
etc.  We are a medium long single train ride to Penn station.   I may be able
to get Victor and John to come here if so [always a good excuse for a
gathering!].  Jack Rubin has also been hear, as well as Warren Stearnes; you
should be talking to him about certain things regarding 12-bit machines.]  And
you can see the collection which is about 15 minutes from here, available 24/7
and has its own lighting and 100 amp service.  Bob may have explained about
that to you, since he was one of the principals filling it!  [It's a converted
ancient carriage house, now a 3-4 car multiple garage with a demised attempt at
living quarters in it.]  As long as we don't make noise, we can literally go
there anytime.



> Thanks,
> 
> Kyle



-- 
"In the future, OS/2 will be on everyone's desktop"

Bill Gates, 1992






On Mon, Dec 5, 2016 at 5:07 PM, Kyle Owen <kylevowen@gmail.com> wrote:
> Hey Charlie,

Hey yourself :-) .
 
> On Fri, Dec 2, 2016 at 11:36 PM, CLASystems <clasystems@gmail.com> wrote:
>>
>> Hi!  Before I start, have you been getting any recent e-mail from me, or is
>> this a new address?  There are some issues [they can wait a bit] but just
>> want to make sure you are getting them.  I heard you helped Bob out a few
>> months ago, etc.
>
> Yessir, I've been receiving, but I've been a bit out of the loop on vintage
> computers at the moment with the revived interest in my player piano. It
> looks like we've got some changes to push to the repository. 

OK, not a problem; timing is everything and that can wait.  I am nearly done
debugging why it doesn't work on the PDP-12 and as of yesterday, it's now all
working except the bootup; I suspect it may be just the lack of a power-clear.
He didn't write a standalone program, he modified the OS/8 BOOT.PA program, and
since this is for pre-8/E, no way to put in a CAF[6007] instruction.,

However, the PDP-12 has a way to do a programmed power clear.  I have to figure
out how to make it NOT execute if run on an -8.  It won't be hard, but I will
do it if it turns out that's why it is booting. [It runs on his 8/E with a KL8
interface, but this is actually a built-in on the PDP-12 chassis, not even on
an external bus, similar to the way the 03/04 interface is implemented on the
older machines as well, etc.

And it may just all boil down to something like do a KCC but on the remote
input from the server.  You'll have to look at what Bob Adamson did to the
server.  I had to fix what he attempted on the OS/8 side.  Hopefully it will
then be a simple generic so it works on all models without tricks.  [But since
this is OS/8's BOOT.PA, there is room to make the code longer.  If you were
toggling it in, you would manually power clear just before starting it.]

Also, I assume this came from you:  You DO NOT Control-C check from within the
SYSTEM handler.  It sets up an infinite loop!  [Non-system is optional of
course.]
 
> By the way, a quick note on that subject, it's actually quite possible to use
> SimH to test SerialDisk

How do you get the serial ports of the PC to work in SIMH?  I would like to
know so I can run my Kermit-12 from there as well.


 
> ; it'd be nice to come up with some unit tests and maybe even an automatic
> installation script to build new OS/8 (or P?S/8) images with the SerialDisk
> handlers installed.

It's not an issue to have RK8E bootable images for the SIMH where non-system
handlers are for the SerialDisk.

I haven't heard about bugs in the newer releases of BUILD.


 
> Optimally, I'd do it without BUILD.SV in hopes that even versions of OS/8
> that have non-working or buggy BUILD.SVs can be used, just by knowing where
> to stuff those words onto the disk. I don't think it would take much to
> figure it out. 

I wouldn't spend much time on that side topic.  With my input, the process
seems to be working fine, but also remember that Dave Gesswein's DUMPREST
program is in the overall loop.  I have to rewrite it because it is needlessly
8K and there are 4K machines out there, such as at RICM.  The program is really
simple, and there is some erroneous and extraneous dependency on OS/8 which
doesn't really participate in the process in any constructive way.  I have
extensive experience in real-time both on the lab-8/e and the -12.  Of course
some of the code is killing a flea with a cannon :-) .
 
>> I lost a good friend less than three years ago.  He was pretty famous in the
>> world of mechanical piano music Randolph Herr.  I can elaborate on that
>> depending on what you already know [which could be nothing, you tell me].
>
> Wow, I did not know the name, but after looking him up (and reading the
> following), I am quite impressed. I would have definitely enjoyed meeting
> him. 

As I am certain he would have liked you.  He was a very friendly and helpful
guy.  He also loved my wife's cooking.

This is off-topic, but my wife loves to cook for as many people as possiblel;
that's her thing.  We had three people die recently, and they all knew each
other and more than once all three were here.

Randy was the first to go, and he was getting better, but this is scary and
impacts on her:

I had pneumonia and almost died about 6-7 years ago from the complications of
among other things pneumonia.  I only found out MUCH later that they were
considering having me taken by ambulence to a better hospital, but long story
short, I walked out of there 15 days later, 4 belt notches skinnier and that's
26 pounds of pretty much edema.

Well, because of his creep brother who happens to live not far from us, he
served his own convenience and put Randy in the SAME hospital!  He had been
getting better, but then caught pneumonia, and because it was "too
inconvenient" to go to the good hospital he was in in Queens, he had him
transferred TO the place they were considering having me TAKEN FROM!  And of
course, it got worse, they decided to induce a coma and he died in the coma not
recovered from pneumonia.

So, you can understand the effect on her!

The next one to go was my friend of over 40 years, who basically taught me to
write.  Before that I was a more typical nerd type and you can really see the
difference between the commenting in my source code from back then versus the
NEW code written recently!

He died of complications from a sarcoma of the leg. last March.

Then about 4 months ago, our friend died of the complications of sepsis and
gangrene because he was in a different hospital, and the root cause was
diabetes and he was on dialysis.

This has not been a good ":season" for her, and beyond that we are on overload
[which does have the good effect of not dwelling on the rest!] [more below].
 
>> I can't say what became of his collection which is a damn shame.  [His
>> family was all deceased except for a really shit of a brother who I can't
>> stand, who actually threatened to sue me on a NOTION he thought he had as a
>> total greedy ignoramus.]
>
> That's a real shame for sure...I hate to hear that. 
>
>> The centerpiece of Randy's collection was an 10' Steinway grand with the
>> modifications by Aeolian to have a built-in pianola in it.  The two
>> companies made exactly 12 of them in Queens not far from my former place.
>> This one had a history as well, search for Stanford White, an infamous NY-er
>> involved in a love triangle with Harry K. Thaw and his wife.  It was a
>> famous scandal from about 100 years ago, and Randy had totally restored it.
>
> Sounds like he was a big Duo-Art guy. I'm definitely keen on an Ampico or
> Duo-Art, and personally, the 4-bit expression control on a Duo-Art seems
> easier to follow than the Ampico stack, which may make it more appealing to
> restore. 

He could do whatever they wanted, but usually it was removing Welte and mostly
Duo-Art but he did Ampico as well.

The Pianola is unencoded in general but supports the little extra punch on the
roll that is the mark of Duo-art.  [I forget the name for that which does a
quick-strike].  He added a mod to ignore the upper and lower 4 notes; I don't
have to explain to you why.



>> So, that was a nice post-script to the story.  And Randy came over at times
>> and we recorded rolls of him playing as well, and of course I have those as
>> well.  I have the only known copy in most cases.
>
> Your story on the Gershwin project is absolutely wonderful! Thank you for
> sharing. I'm thrilled to be talking to someone who was quite instrumental
> (heh) in making that happen! 

	groan!

Worst case I can play them for you on the DOM-30 I own.  [see more below].
 
>> I just wish Randy were available to help you; I guarantee he would, even if
>> he had to drive south to look at it himself!
>
> Same here. I've been emailing a past AMICA president, I believe, Tim Baxter.
> He's in Atlanta and has the capability of punching rolls, which I'm quite
> fascinated by. I've ordered a couple of rolls from him and look forward to
> trying them out. I hope to get involved in AMICA in the near future. 

The place to be if you are serious!  Mention Randy there, probably will ring a
bell to some.


 
>> I know of those things as well; they show up in a few places.  Randy fixed
>> up one of those for Steven Spielberg he has in his home.
>>
>> He also did things for collectors, such as authentic cross-restorations to
>> change over Welte to Aeolian, etc. on pianos shipped to Queens from Europe.
>
> Wow, that's awesome! Who'd have guessed that Spielberg would have one?! 

Randy didn't appreciate that he decorated the cabinet with logos of his movies,
but otherwise it was fine [and he did get paid!].
 
>> I have the DCK10R on a 5'3" grand and an old Yamaha synth.  They also have
>> an old Thinkpad 760EL with a P133 in it so that Teledisk works.
>
> Quite the works! I'm thinking I may like to add some automatic capability to
> my Hammond organ (it's an L-100 series; not particularly valuable), but am
> thinking about first making a piano roll simulator that plugs on top of the
> tracker bar. I don't think anyone's quite done that before, but I haven't
> spent enough time looking to say. 

I think you're right.  Only thing I ever hear about are MIDI-controlled
simulating tone generators, not mods on the original.

I haven't played one of those since the song 96 tears was popular!  [It's not a
hard piece to play, but I was in a situation to be able to do so.

I also have been to the Syracuse fairgrounds and played the theater organ.
There is a slave 8' and 4' stop that indirectly makes a slave piano down on the
stage play!

You may hear about Dave Soerghel in the context of the LINC-8 modifications.
He also restored player pianos and worked with the group that restored and
maintained that huge theatre organ.

I have in my time also worked on an electronic organ circuitry based on
flip-flops to produce octaves of square-wave outputs applied to resistor
networks to produce sawtooth waves, then the stops are post-switch filters.

The "controller" is a prototype Iorio 4- bass accordion with a Centronics 50
connector coming out of it with all the contact closures.  Gold-clad spring
wires on all of the reeds on both sides, etc.  They connected by a big telco
cable, etc.

I had friends back in the 60's who were really good accordion players.  One of
them has a movie credit.  He's "the accordion player" in the movie Finnegan's
Wake.  [Look it up in IMDB.]   The flip-flops were Fairchild RTL chips in round
8-pin plastic packages.  It is notable that DEC used the Motorola ones in DIP
packages in the serial boards of the PT08.  [And the failure mode is the lands
can't carry the current and tend to break the power or ground land UNDER one of
the chips!]

>> There are not too many of us who do computers AND music.  John Wilson plays
>> the recorder and bagpipes and a restored harpsichord.
>
> You're right! I got started almost 20 years ago playing the accordion; I took
> lessons for 11 years

I never took lessons for that.  My friends showed me about the weird
circle-of-fifths bass and the need to play with the bellows, but I picked it up
pretty quickly.  BTW, one of these companies made a
left-hand-same-as-right-hand accordion!
 
> , then continued on my own after my teacher was not in too good of shape. She
> passed away several years ago at the age of 88, but during her time, taught
> nearly four generations of students. Quite impressive. 

Mine died when I was in HS.  She had about three generations, but got sick in
her 60's.  They tried to make me sing, but when my voice changed, forget it!
But piano was good.  I did some of the nastier things like Liszt's Hungarian
Rhapsody with the cross-over notes, etc.

 

> I had always wanted a piano too, namely a player piano, but my parents
> refused to let me have one. After moving out for college, I started seriously
> looking. 

Good for you.  That was never a problem for me growing up.  When I started as a
little kid, we got for free an indestructible Hardman and Peck, then in 1956
they bought me from a Manhattan dealer [I  remember pianos stretching in all
directions!] a Kranich and Bach that it turned out went to making bad crap
within two years of this one.  I had a string of tuners who were at first
apprehensive but the comment was "this one has the good frets" so it was fine.
I've since heard the newer ones never hold a tune because of the cheaper
design.  It's still in the care of the guy a bit west of here that worked with
Randy french polishing the wood for the units he restored the "innards" etc.
Also, the creep brother tried to tell me that Rick Smith was a crook.  [He is
not; he is a character, but not a crook.  I think he has a website; he's in
Glen Cove which is west of here, but not quite as far west as Queens where
Randy and I grew up.

I've finally gotten used to being a "long lslander" but I got around back then
because when my eyes worked, I drove EVERYWHERE.  In fact, when we met, I drove
her from NY to St. Cloud in Fl in a total of 20 hours and that included a
snowstorm in Va.  We had a great time for a bunch of reasons.

1)  Her son was getting married to his second wife, and we were all in this
ancient hotel in the "historical district".  We had both of the largest
"suites" [they had the "honeymoon" and we had the "presidential"].  The place
has a history, it is the frat house in the Adam Sandler movie The Water Boy.

We primarily went to Universal and Disney, and it was the Y2K year, so there
were special celebrations.

But then we didn't leave:  This was planned out.  As a Benjamin Moore paint
dealer, we were invited for three days at a Disney resort hotel [The Coronado]
and a few more days passes and a trade show sponsored by Benjamin Moore and had
the various paint-mixing machine company's latest stuff, and I had a bone or 50
to pick with the software people, and I got to talk to an appropriate insider
to air my various grievances to, and a lot got fixed, etc.  So, that was
helpful.

But what we didn't know is that Benjamin Moore also had something special
planned.  We were all bussed that evening to the MGM studios for a special
closed to the public event.  If you have ever been there, there are faux movie
marquees.  All of them were welcoming us, and they had their "players" coming
to cheer us getting off the busses as if we were heroes [they wanted my
autograph, etc.]

The place was about 60% open, all completely free including the ice cream
vendors, eat what you want, and then they had a special barbeque meal setup,
which was vaguely similar to what was done on New Year's Eve which by then was
just under a week before!

Then we drove back to NY, taking a bit more time.  Also, when we got to the
hotel, we were the first to arrive [because we only had to drive 15 minutes]
and the planes all came in later, thus we were "local" so to speak.

btw, I have also been to Alachua, the home of one of Kathy's friends, which is
40 miles west of Bob.  But that was a dfferent trip.  I've managed to aggregate
about 1.5 years in Fl, because my parents retired to Deerfield Beach, etc. so I
know my way around most of the state.

Also, the year DECUS was held in NO, I drove there from NY in 28 hours with
only three "input output" stops the entire trip.  Then I drove east through
gulfport and in to the panhandle, so I was in Alabama briefly.  I saw lots of
Spanish moss but I didn't stop because the Pearl River was reaching flood
stage, and they said the roads were closed less than 8 hours after I was there;
I saw the water level next to the road was VERY high, etc.

Then I called my parents from Pensacola, and said "I'm in Florida" technically.
It's almost a thousand miles from there to Deerfield Beach; I got there many
hours later, and collapsed into bed, woke up late the next day and had missed
their share of the same stom.  Then about a week later drove back to NY.

On a totally different trip I drove from NY to St Louis to that DECUS show,
then we went to Mexico [Juarez] then to Dunes and San Diego then North to SF
and then east to Arizona carrying a TU56 and a TD8E card in the trunk the
entire way, dropped that off and hooked it up to the guy's 8/E, and then went
from Scottsdale, to Flagstaff, went to the Grand Canyon, then the north Rim of
the Grand Canyon [over 200 more miles of driving to get to 1.1 miles away!] and
then to the painted desert and the petrified forest, and then headed east to
Champaign Illinois to see Ron Larkin who had been in NY but now out there with
an 8/E in the forest studying bats.  Then we wound up in St Louis back
literally from where we started from, then went back to NY.  Six weeks and over
12,000 miles and wore out a set of tires.  So, you can see why having a disease
that makes me not able to drive is really a frustrating problem.

The doctors tell me the symptoms sometimes fade and also that having had one
remission I am statistically more likely to get another remission.  I am still
waiting for any statistics to catch up with reality.  But the good news is I am
stable and it is not life-threatening, just life-altering in the eye-sight
sense.   So, Kathy drives and I navigate.

We do need to broach the subject of how to approach Lonnie regarding some of my
machines.  I assume you might play a role in these restoration projects as
well.

I would think the best thing for him to do is pay me as a consultant at any
pace he chooses.  i can do a lot between skype and phones and of course e-mail
and even teamviewer where applicable.

But as Bob says, you are the one that knows him best, so we leave it for you to
suggest a what/when and where, etc.  Timing is wide open other than right now:
[see more below].



> Music and computers are quite a nice combination; I'm collecting LPs and
> books on the subject, in fact. I've got both "Unplayed by Human Hands", which
> as you are probably aware, is a collection of organ performances played by a
> PDP-8. I also have the First Philadelphia Computer Music Festival LP, which
> is not quite as well done, but has some interesting microcomputers playing
> various songs in a wide range of quality (most fairly poor; some of the
> arrangements have wrong notes or rhythms which detract from the 8-bit nature
> of it even more). My latest find is a book, Music by Computers, which has 4
> flexi discs with some very avant-garde tunes. That pretty much, in my
> opinion, sums up the types of computer music: computers playing instruments,
> computers generating traditional songs, and computers pushing the limits of
> music to new levels not quite possible before. 

Sounds good, but no, not crossed paths with any of that.  But I would take any
.MP3 or FLAC copies of anything at least!

 

>> ps:  If you ever get a chance to come to NY, please do and we can put you
>> up, etc.  We are a medium long single train ride to Penn station.   I may be
>> able to get Victor and John to come here if so [always a good excuse for a
>> gathering!].  Jack Rubin has also been here, as well as Warren Stearnes; you
>> should be talking to him about certain things regarding 12-bit machines.]
>> And you can see the collection which is about 15 minutes from here,
>> available 24/7 and has its own lighting and 100 amp service.  Bob may have
>> explained about that to you, since he was one of the principals filling it!
>> [It's a converted ancient carriage house, now a 3-4 car multiple garage with
>> a demised attempt at living quarters in it.]  As long as we don't make
>> noise, we can literally go there anytime.
 
>
> Yes, we should plan a 12-bit family reunion up there! I may have some time
> this month to make that happen. That would be quite fun!

All good except the timing!
Right now this is a "war zone" or at least it resembles one.
 


> I have family in Hoboken, so if rooms get tight, there's always that too.

I'll keep that in mind, but I do know worst case, if you can sleep on the floor
next to 6;7" John [who prefers it and comes prepared, he camps a lot] that
would be the worst case.

When Victor comes here, he has his fancy expense account stuff, and flies his
plane to the nearby airport and stays at the Marriott Residence Inn that caters
to pilots.  We pick him up from either which are two miles from here and go out
to eat [always on him, it's his way].

Jack is actually from Rochester, NY originally but is now in the Chicago area.
But he has a sister in Manhattan who actually has a car!  In fact, it is used
so little, we had to give him a jump start to drive it back.  Have you crossed
paths with Jack?  He used to come here a lot more often, because he had
offspring living in Brooklyn, but they moved somewhere else, so it's less
often.

He came here because he was specifically in NY for the funeral of Wes Clarke,
the inventor of the LINC, so he came out afterwards, etc.  He says he should
get to us about once or twice a year.  He MUST have NY pastrami on rye!  [I can
relate.]

John is a 4 hour drive away in the hills of Ma.  His schedule is fairly tight
punctuated by longer periods of easy availability.  His "complication" is he
has a new girlfriend for now just over a year.  She is about two hours away in
NH; we have similar driving aspirations, but he can still see enough to do it
at all.  Timing for him not setup in advance is probably 30/70 against,
especially this time of year.

now to our problems:

My wife's business partner has been living with us in the "attic" level for
well over three years now.  He's gong through a VERY bad divorce [no children
at least!] with his two ferrets.  We have 2.5 bathrooms so it's now a problem.
There is in theory an end in sight finally, but we have no idea what is going
to happen and we of course cannot push him at this stage as his various legal
battles are hopefully close to over, etc.

But we have another "layer".  He is a paint contractor and there are all sorts
of related things all over the place because he is doing renovations of one of
the bathrooms and the spiral staircase that goes up two flights to where he is,
while we have the master bedroom on the second floor, and in the back is what
we laughingly refer to as "my room" which is beyond overflow; I can't even get
in the room [but he can, he's very skinny].

The other slightly smaller room is Kathy's and that's where we put people up
temporarily.  But there are boxes of anything and everything everywhere!

What is motivating all of this is we have to have an appraisal so we can get a
refinance;  we have a loan that has been interest-only for ten years and is now
turning into a fixed ten year note but the interest rate is way too high, so we
are negotiating with both the main mortgage holder and the second lien holder
to see who can give us the better deal, etc.  Either way, someone has to come
and appraise it, so we have to get this done.  The drop dead date is Feb 6, but
this time of year, all such things crawl, so unless they can get this all done
now, it will cascade over until new years, and we better have an appraisal done
before that so January is just closing stuff with the amount determined, etc.

So, this is not a good time for anything, meals are rushed, lots of trips to
various stores, Kathy picking out stuff, colors, etc. and her room is on
overload with some stuff that would make more sense elsewhere were it not
instead overloaded with tools for awhile, etc.

Thus, this all has to be planned for after all this maelstrom of confusion,
etc.

to make matters worse, we need to spend serious money repairing the Disklavier.
There was a SERIOUSLY bad winter and there are broken strings.  I heard them
happen!  [It's like a gun going off.]

I'm hoping it's just a matter of restringing the treble side, in which case it
could be as little as two notes since they have multiple strings.  Beyond the
expense, the rest are likely to have to be loosened, and then the repair and
then slowly retuning it gradually until it can hold, etc.  It can take months
I've been told.

So, we have to save our pennies once the re-fi is in effect, but after a couple
of months, that itself should no longer be a problem.  Monthly payment should
actually DROP.

We may eventually move with so many people we knew here no longer alive.  But
clearly we have a couple of years of "overhead" to get past, including
finalizing my installment sale on the former Queens building, and when she and
her partner sell the building [perhaps to one of the tenants].  Then our
financial problems will be gone.

And of course, this sort of defines the time-frame, if not the exact
disposition of the larger DEC systems.  I really cannot maintain anything
larger than a DECmate or two or three realistically.  But the collection is
about 10 minutes from here in the carriage house as I described, etc.

This is not the norm here, I hope you understand.  And when it is over, has to
be in the later winter into early spring by definition, things will start
returning to the less chaotic semi-norm that has been the way for 4 years now,
etc.

Life here is at least "interesting" most of the time :-).

cjl 
